Introduction
============

.. figure:: _images/viewer_all_views.png
   :scale: 75%
   :alt: pygarv_all_views

The ``mkpy`` Python package provides transparent open access to human
and machine readable continuous and epoched EEG data for reproducible
analysis in scientific computing frameworks. ``mkpy`` is built around
an unopinionated EEG data interchange format (``mkh5``) that smoothly
and flexibly merges multichannel EEG data with the many other other
kinds of heterogenous experimental data required for single trial EEG
data analyses. The format is implemented in HDF5 which makes it
portable across scientific computing platforms within and between
labs.


Familiar problems
------------------

``mkpy`` addresses problems that EEG researchers working with
open-source EEG data analysis toolboxes such as EEGLAB, ERPLAB,
Brainstorm, MNE Python likely have encountered or will.

The functional unit for EEG research is the experiment: subjects,
stimuli, responses, dependent and independent variables. There are few
principled bounds on the electrophysiological investigation of human
information processing: what happens before, during, and after
individuals are stimulated (if they are) and respond (if they do). The
space of possible experimental designs and variables is vast and
defined by the diversity of scientific aims and creativity of
researchers.

The functional unit for EEG data analysis is the discrete time-series,
longer or shorter stretches of digitized EEG data stored in one or
more computer files. Analysis of discrete time-series data includes
time-domain averaging along with other types of analysis: Fourier,
wavelet, linear discriminant, principled component, independent
component, multiple regression, multivariate pattern recognition,
etc., etc., etc..

The functional unit for statistical analysis at present is the 2-D
rows x columns data table e.g., data.frame, tibble, data.table for
modeling in R; numpy.ndarray and pandas.DataFrame for modeling with
statsmodels in python.

In the context of an EEG experiment, measures derived from signal
processing transformations are but one variable among many. The
problem, then, is how to knit all the relevant variables together into
a data table so the statistical analyses can be conducted to answer
the research question. This is not conceptually difficult, it is a
form of database merge that combines and aligns values from
heterogenous sources and exposes the result in a useful format. At
present, however, the process is encumbered by the wide variety of
binary EEG data file formats and data structures that have emerged
over time as EEG data acquisition systems and open-source signal
processing toolboxes have evolved.


Toward a solution
------------------

The ``mkpy`` framework shifts the focus in EEG data analysis away from
EEG signal processing data files and data structures and toward
experimental design and analyses as the functional unit.

Rather than trying to decide in advance what may, must, and cannot go
in EEG data file+header formats or in-memory EEG data structures, the
approach is to let experimenters make those decisions and concentrate
instead on making the files (``mkh5``) easy to work with regardless of
what data they contain and what scientific computing environment they
find themselves in. This approach is familiar from the concept of
human-readable text data interchange formats like `Javascript Object
Notation (JSON) <https://www.json.org>`_ and `YAML Ain't Markup
Language (YAML) <http://yaml.org/spec/1.2/spec.html>`_: simple but
flexible (recursive) containers for arbitrarily complex content. The
`Hierarchical Data Format v. 5 (HDF5)
<https://portal.hdfgroup.org/display/support>`_ file specification is
a (less-simple) recursive container framework for binary data.

Likewise the ``mkh5`` data model is also simple recursive container
format for data from EEG experiments: a single format for
continuous EEG, epoched single trial EEG, and the cornucopia of
non-EEG variables that must be knit together with the EEG data when
analyzing and interpreting designed experiments.

The format is familar: table-like blocks of time-series data travel
with a dictionary-like header of keys and values. Simplification comes
from enforcing a single, flexible format on the structure of the
datablock and headers. Human and cross-platform machine readability
comes from implementing the datablock as an HDF5 compound data type
and the header as a single JSON string.

* an interval of time is modeled by an uninterrupted series of
  fixed-rate digital samples with no temporal pauses, discontinuities,
  gaps, or boundaries. The interval may be short, e.g., 1 sample
  (a.k.a. "event") or longer, e.g., 1000 samples (a.k.a "epoch"), or
  much longer (100000 samples, a.k.a. "continuous EEG"). These differ
  only in length not kind.

* for a given interval of *n* samples there two kinds of experimental
  variables: those that change during the interval (the data streams)
  and those that do not (constants).

  Data streams

     Values that change during the interval are stored in a table-like
     block: rows (samples) x columns (data streams).  Each data stream
     column is named, and each stream is of a single scalar data type:
     floating point, integer, unsigned integer, string, boolean. The
     number and data type of columns may vary ad lib. 

  Constants

    Values that do not change during the interval are stored as a
    recursive `key:value` map terminating in data-typed scalars. The
    header travels with the data block and is encoded as a single
    utf-8 JSON string. Maps may be added to the header ad lib.

That's it.

There is no "EEG data file format" per se. Instead there are a few
simple rules (syntax) governing how the data in the data block and
header are organized. The data streams that appear in the data block
columns and the information embedded in the header are whatever the
researcher finds useful for a particular purpose. And as these
purposes change, the information that travels with the EEG data can
change as well.

``mkh5`` files are constructed by translating a native EEG data
recording file into a sequence of one or more data blocks. The data
blocks can be arranged in the HDF5 file or files to suit the
requirements of the experiment. The data blocks from accidentally
split sessions with multiple data files can be glued back together
into a single file if needed.  Long sessions can be split into
different ``mkh5`` files. The data blocks can be organized into
separate files for each subject and analyzed separately or combined
into a single large file and analyzed together.  Within a single file,
multi-session designs can be organized by nesting subjects in sessions
or sessions in subjects or not nested at all.

The tabular data block and the headers are both "stretchy" by design.
Columns and header entries can be added or deleted provided only that
the that the time-delta is constant between rows and the header tracks
the name, index, and data-type of the data block columns. The JSON
header can hold anything that JSON can encode which covers most of
what experimenters generally need to track by way of experimental
variables.

Once an ``mkh5`` file is constructed, continuous or single-trial data
analysis of single subjects or entire experiments is greatly
simplified since there is no principled distinction between parts of
data files and whole data files or subjects and experiments. All of
these are the same data structure: a sequence of one or more
well-formed data blocks + header.

After the initial conversion to ``mkh5`` no further import/export
parsers are required and cross-platform portability is immediate. By
using built-in functions or 3rd party hdf5 library wrappers, the
``mkh5`` HDF5 files can be read and written with a few lines of code
in Python, MATLAB, and R on linux, Mac OS, and Windows.

The ``mkh5`` data block maps directly to data frames/tables in R,
Pandas, and MATLAB. The JSON header maps directly to native
structures, e.g., R named lists, Python dicts, and MATLAB
structs. This makes merging continuous and single-trial EEG data with
arbitrary non-EEG variables from other sources entirely
straightforward by taking advantage of existing table transformation
functions: row and column slicing operations by name or index to
access parts of a single table; table row and column stacking
operations to construct new tables; function application by row, by
column, and by group using column variables as the grouping factor.

Furthermore, any data the experimenter has embedded in the header or
imported from an external source can be readily merged with the data
block column EEG time-series and this can be whatever heterogenous
information the experimenter deems useful, from recording session
parameters and free-form experimenter notes to electrode locations,
pre- and post-test scores, biomarkers, demographics, artifact
screening criteria, etc., etc.. The JSON header format *allows* ready
access to whatever information is traveling with the EEG data in the
data block but does not *require* any particular header fields or
content beyond the column index. Likewise the external data import
also *allows* easy access to heterogenous information without
*requiring* any of it. This flexibility allows the experimenter to
smoothly marry the sampled EEG data to whatever sorts of experimental
variables are useful for whatever sort of *analysis* is needed to
answer research question.

In sum, the ``mkh5`` approach is to define a simple, consistent
structure that is extensible in simple, consistent ways. The flexible
data blocks and headers can stretch as needed to accommodate very
different experimental designs and analyses while the consistent
format streamlines the development of what must inevitably be
semi-custom analysis pipelines.


``mkpy`` overview
------------------

Although originally designed as a data interchange format for Kutas lab
binary ERPSS ``.crw`` and ``.log`` files, the file format is
unopinionated and EEG data from any system could be stored as `mkh5`.

In addition to database-like operations to create, update, and retrieve
``mkh5`` format HDF5 files, the ``mkpy`` package provides utilities for
visualizing and screening continuous and epoched EEG data
(``pygarv``), for tagging EEG data with experimental variables of
interest from the header and external data sources, and for exporting
single trial epochs is various data interchange formats for convenient
analysis. 

``mkh5``
    EEG data (floating point), timestamps (unsigned int), event codes
    (ints), trigger lines, position sensor data, etc.., values change
    from sample to sample. These and other such data streams go in the
    tabular data block columns. Subject information, apparatus
    settings, etc. don't change from sample to sample. That goes in
    the header. 

``pygarv/mkh5viewer``
    EEG artifact screening tests are stored on disk in human and
    machine-readable YAML. When the tests are applied, pass-fail
    results are logged in a datablock column so it travels with the
    data from then on. The tests and parameters themselves are stored
    in the datablock header. Tests can be viewed and edited
    interactively.

``codetagger`` 
    Arbitrary experimental design factors and levels are pulled from
    the header and/or imported from external YAML, Excel .xlsx, or
    tab-separated text and anchored to pattern-matched time-stamped
    integer event codes in the continuous EEG data *before* extracting
    single trial epochs and data reduction.

``export_epochs``
    The tagged single-trial EEG data epochs can be exported in tabular
    format as HDF5, feather, or tab-separated text for downstream
    analysis.



